Translator: Tijana Mihajlović
Reviewer: Denise RQ
Good morning.
Are we alone?
Do we live in a Universe
that is populated
with many, many intelligent species,
or are we, as human beings,
just the only intelligent life
anywhere in the Universe?
The last couple of centuries
have been a triumph of modern astronomy.
We can now trace back
the history of the Universe
to just seconds after the Big Bang,
when our Universe began.
We can watch
the Cosmic Microwave Background
and map out the structure
of the very early Universe.
We can track the very first stars
that formed in the first few hundreds
of millions of years
after the Universe was born.
We can track the formation of galaxies.
We understand nearly everything
that there is to know
about the way that the Universe was born
and the way that the Universe
continues to evolve,
except for one
very glaring exception: life.
We know that in the very first
few hundreds of millions of years
after the Earth formed,
life arose on our planet.
We know that from fossils
like these, stromatolites,
that were formed
by the very first organisms
that existed on our planet, cyanobacteria.
So very quickly, as soon as the Earth
cooled off, after its formation,
we know that life began here.
And even more amazing than the fact
that a self-replicating organism
somehow came forth,
amidst the laws of thermodynamics
that govern our Universe,
that life evolved fantastic complexity,
and, in fact,
eventually evolved intelligence.
Amazingly enough, we now know
that nearly every single star
in our galaxy hosts a planet.
And something like one in five
of those stars
hosts a planet something like the Earth,
at just the right distance from the star
to have liquid water exist on the surface.
But on any of those planets
did life arise?
Did something similar
to what happened on our own planet
happened on those other planets?
We know that the galaxy is awash in water,
it's awash in organic molecules,
and complex chemistry.
All of the things that we know
were necessary for life
to begin on this planet
exist in abundance throughout the galaxy.
But did life ever arise
on any of those planets?
And even more pressing of a question:
did that life - if it did arise -
did it ever go on to develop intelligence?
Is intelligence a common outcome of life?
Is intelligence a driven process?
Does life proceed towards intelligence
for some reason
that we don't yet understand,
or is intelligence simply
some evolutionary fluke
that only happened on one single planet
that maybe did develop life?
And again, even more interesting,
if intelligence does arise commonly,
how far can technology progress?
How advanced could
very advance life become?
The Universe is nearly
14 billion years old,
and our Galaxy is something like
12 billion years old.
So there could be life out there
if it evolved intelligence
that could be dramatically more advanced
than the life that we have
here on this planet.
Now, we don't have any way
of directly detecting intelligent life,
so we use technology or can use technology
as a proxy for intelligence.
Here, on this planet,
we have been producing technology
that has been emitting signals
that would be detectable
at very, very large distances,
well out into the Galaxy
for hundreds of years.
These are things like high-power TV
and radio transmitters
that we use for communication systems
here on Earth,
radars that we use to map
other planets in our Solar System,
or asteroids that we have
in our own Solar System,
and also laser technology.
We don't do this yet here on our planet,
but it's an amazing fact
that if you take our most powerful lasers
and our largest mirrors,
and you pair them together,
for the fraction of a second
that our most powerful lasers
can produce light,
they can outshine the Sun
by factors of a thousand
and more than a thousand light years away.
We have just announced a brand new program
that we think is going to be
humanity's best chance ever
to answer this question.
It's called "Breakthrough listen".
It's humanity's boldest attempt ever
to determine whether or not
we are alone as intelligent beings.
It's a 100-million-dollar ten-year project
that will use three telescopes
to conduct the most comprehensive,
sensitive, and intensive search
for extraterrestrial intelligence
in history.
We're going to use optical telescopes,
one called The Automated Planet Finder,
that is just about an hour away from here,
near San Jose at Lick Observatory,
and two of the world's
largest radio telescopes,
the Parkes Telescope
in Australia, near Sidney,
and the Green Bank Telescope
in West Virginia,
here in the United States.
The Green Bank Telescope
is one of the world's largest
movable structures,
and it is, in fact,
the largest fully steerable antenna
that we have here, on this planet.
With the telescope
like the Green Bank Telescope,
we could detect a human-like technology
nearly to the center of the Galaxy.
We're going to search
a variety of different types of objects.
We're going to conduct
a survey of a million stars,
about a thousand light years
or so off the Earth.
We're going to conduct
a comprehensive survey
of the entire plane
of our Milky Way Galaxy,
and we're going to search
a hundred nearby galaxies
to see if that very, very advanced life
might have developed
the necessary technology
to transmit at truly extraordinary
distances between galaxies.
Let's take a look
at how that's going to work.
Here's an animation
of the Milky Way Galaxy.
Imagine that somewhere
in the Milky Way Galaxy
intelligent life arises
and begins to transmit.
If they did so,
their transmissions would proceed
at the speed of light out from their star,
for as long
as that intelligent life existed.
And that would form
a bubble of electromagnetic radiation
that we might be able
to detect here on Earth.
But how long do these civilizations live?
They might develop life, intelligent life,
and then some technology,
and a radio signal.
But that radio signal
will only continue to emit
for as long as the civilization lives.
But these bubbles
of electromagnetic radiation
continue out into the Galaxy
at the speed of light.
And here, on Earth,
we can potentially detect those
with our very large radio telescopes.
Here's the Earth itself transmitting
electromagnetic radiation, radio signals,
and here are these bubbles of radiation
from signals from other intelligences
that are sweeping across the Earth.
And we can detect those again
with the telescopes
like the Green Bank Telescope here.
This is an animation of the signal
that we might expect to see
from that civilization.
And also with the Parkes Telescope
in Australia.
It's not just us that's going to be
doing the data analysis.
With Breakthrough Listen,
there is a very key component
of the program
that will make all of the data
that we collect
available to the public immediately.
It will, in fact, when complete,
be the largest amount of scientific data
that's ever been made available
to public for any experiment whatsoever.
This is one of the ways
that you can get involved in that program
with an application developed
here at Berkeley called SETI@home.
This is a program that you can download
on your computer,
and when you're not using your computer,
when you're getting up
to get a cup of coffee,
if you take long enough,
your computer will wake up,
it'll download a little bit of the data
that we collected
at these giant radio telescopes,
and use your computer
to do the very computationally
intensive processing
that's required to detect
these very weak signals
that we're looking for.
And your computer will join
with hundreds of thousands
of other computers,
and will in fact form
the largest supercomputer
on the entire planet Earth,
dedicated solely to hunting for evidence
of extraterrestrial intelligence.
And here's a video showing
how this process works.
Here we see Berkeley, California,
where we all are here.
All of the data that we collect
from these telescopes
being sent out
to hundreds of thousands of volunteers,
and then results of those computations
being sent back to us at Berkeley.
And if one of those little blue dots
comes from your computer
and happens to contain evidence
of extraterrestrial intelligence,
you too will share in the Nobel Prize
that we will surely win.
(Laughter)
But I warn you,
you have to share it with the hundreds
of thousands of other volunteers
that participated in the project,
so you might only get a couple nickels.
But surely it would be one
of the most remarkable discoveries
in the history of humanity.
So I wanted to take a minute
to look back briefly
at one of the still images
from the video that I showed you
to point out something very remarkable
about the search
for extraterrestrial intelligence
and something that we do in this science.
So here we see the bubbles
of electromagnetic radiation
coming out from the civilizations
that may exist somewhere
in our Milky Way Galaxy.
And these bubbles
of electromagnetic radiation,
they have fixed widths;
they're not constant.
And that reflects
the lifetime of the civilizations
that might be arising.
And this is something that's captured
in a very famous equation in this field,
called the Drake Equation,
named after Frank Drake,
one of the pioneers of this field.
I promise that this is
the most complicated bit of mathematics
that I'll show you today,
but I think it's worthwhile
to take a minute to walk through this.
So this equation here,
N is the number of civilizations
that we might be able to detect.
And it's expressed as a product
of all of the factors
that might go in
to the emergence of intelligent life.
R*, the rate of star formation
in our Galaxy.
Fp, the fraction of those stars
that have planets.
Ne, the fraction of those
that are something like the Earth.
Fl, the fraction of those
that actually develop life.
Fi, the fraction of those that actually
go on to develop intelligence.
Fc, the factor
of those intelligent species
that go on to develop
some kind of communication technology
that we might be able to detect.
But perhaps the most interesting factor
in this equation is L,
the lifetime of the civilization.
How long can an intelligent,
communicative civilization actually exist?
Now, if we look at our own technology
and our own human society,
we might ask the question,
well, maybe not very long,
maybe only a few hundred years.
Can a truly advanced technology exist
for thousands and thousands of years
without destroying themselves?
This is something that we're able
to probe directly in our experiments
to search for intelligent life.
We're now just beginning to explore
the area around our own planet.
In a hundred years,
surely the area around our planet
is going to be populated
with innumerable satellites,
communication, technology,
perhaps we'll visit the Moon again,
perhaps we'll have a colony on Mars.
Maybe in a thousand years
we might actually have
permanent colonies in space.
We can sort of imagine getting that far
with our own current technology.
But where might we be in the far future?
Can we as humans being exist long enough
to actually travel between the stars?
Could our technology progress far enough
that we could actually become
an interstellar civilization,
sailing between the stars
on giant spacecraft?
This is the ultimate question
of the search
for extraterrestrial intelligence.
We're searching for life beyond the Earth,
but truly what we're searching for
is our own future.
We're asking the question:
what is the future
of an intelligent civilization?
How long can they last?
This is something that a pioneer
in this field, Phillip Morrison
called "the archeology of the future".
Because of the finite speed of light,
we're studying civilizations
as they were a thousand,
or maybe ten thousand years ago.
Our galaxy is a hundred thousand
light years across.
So if we detect a signal
from a civilization
that is on the other side of the Galaxy,
we're seeing that civilization as it was
a hundred thousand years ago.
But because our Galaxy is so old,
many billions of years,
it's likely
that that civilization we detect
is much, much more advanced than we are,
and has been around much, much longer.
So although we're looking
at that civilization's past,
we may be looking
at our own civilization's future.
Thank you.
(Applause)